slides.md, before:

---
marp: true
---
# Introduction to GitHub and Version Control

<style>
img[alt~="center"] {
  display: block;
  margin: 0 auto;
}
</style>

![h:500 center](./pictures/computer-nerd.png)

---

![h:620 center](./pictures/final-doc.png)

<!-- Another advantage of Git is saving yourself from things like this... -->

---
# Why Use Version Control?

- A better kind of backup
- Review history of your changes
- Restore older code versions, like an unlimited undo
- Nothing commited to version control can be lost _unless you make it happen_
- Saves you emailing files back and forth if you are working with others
- Different people can make changes to the same code in parallel

<!-- Even if you're the only one doing the coding, there are still benefits to using Version Control. -->

---
# What is Git and GitHub?

Git: Version control tool to manage code history. Runs on the command line.
GitHub: Hosting service for Git repositories.
GitHub Desktop: A GUI for using Git commands.

There are alternatives to Git and there are alternatives to GitHub.

---

![h:520 center](./pictures/github-git-difference.png)

---
# Creating a GitHub Account

1. Go to github.com and click on "Sign up" in the top-right
2. Follow the instructions to create an account
3. Verify your email adddress with GitHub
4. Configure 2FA

---
# Creating a Repo

1. Open GitHub Desktop
2. In the top-menu go to File and then click "New repository..."
3. Give the repository a name and a description
4. Set a local path for the repository

<!-- A demo goes here. -->

---
# Creating a Text File

Now let's create a simple text file and add two lines of text to it. This will cause a change to appear in GitHub Desktop.

1. On the top-level menu go to Repository > Show in Explorer / Finder
2. Create a text file and add two lines of random text to it

If you're on Mac you can use `touch a-text-file` to create an empty file. Then `echo "blahblahblah" >> a-text-file` should add something to the file. Do that a second time and you'll have a file with two lines of text in it.

---

# Changes Tab

![h:520 center](./pictures/diff-add.png)

The Changes tab shows us what has changed in our files since the most recent commit.

<!-- 

Now you can see that a change in our working directory has been detected in GitHub Desktop. 

Could do a comparison here with Git command line as well?

-->

---
# Staging and Commiting Files

Once we've made some changes that we want to record, we can make a _commit_.

1. Tick the checkbox next to the file you want to include in the next commit. This _stages_ the file.
2. Give the commit a message. This should describe the changes that you have made to the file(s). You can also provide an optional description.
3. Click the blue Commit button. This will now create a new "snapshot" of our repository.

---
# History

<!-- ![h:400 center](./pictures/history.png) -->

Take a look at the History tab. You can now see the commit with its message. The right hand pane will show us what was changed in this commit.

---
# Changing / Removing Lines

Now change the _second_ line of your file and see what happens in the Changes tab.

<!-- Give people a moment to do this before going to the next slide. -->

<!-- ![h:600 center](./pictures/line-change.png) -->

<!-- Now we can see that a red line has appeared to indicate that something was removed, while a green line indicates that something was added. -->

---
# Resetting a Change

- You might change a file, then realise that this isn't actually a change you wanted.
- If you haven't commited yet then you can correct this by resetting the file.
- In GitHub Desktop this is done by right clicking the file in the Changes tab and clicking on "Discard changes..."
- This will take the file back to the state it was in in the most recent commit.

---
# Amending Commits

- Sometimes we make a slight typo in our commit messages or realise it's missing something that it ought to say.
- In this case, you'd _amend_ your commit.
- In GitHub Desktop this is done by right clicking the commit in the History tab and then changing your commit message.
- Ideally you want to do this _before_ pushing the code to GitHub. (I will talk about pushing code in a bit...)

---
# So how often to commit?

- When it _feels right_...
- When you've done a 10-15 minute "chunk" of work.
- When you have something that may doesn't fully solve the problem you're working on, but is at least a "complete" step towards solving that problem.

Smaller commits make it easier to isolate problems.

<!-- It's hard to define what exactly that point is, but it will make sense with more experience. -->

---
# Publishing a Repo

- Publishing allows us to have a copy of the repo on GitHub.
- You can hit the publish button to do this.
- Now take a look at your GitHub profile and see the repository that's been added.

<!-- Demo goes here. -->

---
# Cloneing

---
# .gitignore

- A .gitignore file lets Git know that you don't want a certain file to be tracked with version control.
- In GitHub Desktop we can right click a file and add it to .gitignore.
- It will no longer appear in the Changes tab unless it's removed from .gitignore.
- The .gitingore file is also something you will want to track with version control.
---
# Branching


---
# Overview

![h:400 center](./pictures/command-diagram.svg)

If you understand this, then you pretty much understand Git :)

---

# Extra: Cool Git Stuff


---
#  `lazygit`

- A terminal UI for using Git.
- Nice if you're a touch-typer.
- Other alternatives to GitHub Desktop: GitKraken, `gitui`, 

---
# The magic of `bisect`

`git bisect` is actually overpowered...

---
# Keeping code tidy with `pre-commit`

- `pre-commit` is a tool that ensures certain checks on your file pass before a commit is accepted.
- This could be a linting tool. 

---
# Keeping track of documents with Git

![h:480 center](./pictures/latex-example.png)

LaTeX is comfy.

---

![h:480 center](./pictures/dissertation-commit-log.PNG)

Commit message:

Added cloning slide and some other stuff

slides.md, after:

---
marp: true
---
# Introduction to GitHub and Version Control

<style>
img[alt~="center"] {
  display: block;
  margin: 0 auto;
}
</style>

![h:500 center](./pictures/computer-nerd.png)

---

![h:620 center](./pictures/final-doc.png)

<!-- Another advantage of Git is saving yourself from things like this... -->

---
# Why Use Version Control?

- A better kind of backup
- Review history of your changes
- Restore older code versions, like an unlimited undo
- Nothing commited to version control can be lost _unless you make it happen_
- Saves you emailing files back and forth if you are working with others
- Different people can make changes to the same code in parallel

<!-- Even if you're the only one doing the coding, there are still benefits to using Version Control. -->

---
# What is Git and GitHub?

Git: Version control tool to manage code history. Runs on the command line.
GitHub: Hosting service for Git repositories.
GitHub Desktop: A GUI for using Git commands.

There are alternatives to Git and there are alternatives to GitHub.

---

![h:520 center](./pictures/github-git-difference.png)

---
# Creating a GitHub Account

1. Go to github.com and click on "Sign up" in the top-right
2. Follow the instructions to create an account
3. Verify your email adddress with GitHub
4. Configure 2FA

---
# Creating a Repo

1. Open GitHub Desktop
2. In the top-menu go to File and then click "New repository..."
3. Give the repository a name and a description
4. Set a local path for the repository

<!-- A demo goes here. -->

---
# Creating a Text File

Now let's create a simple text file and add two lines of text to it. This will cause a change to appear in GitHub Desktop.

1. On the top-level menu go to Repository > Show in Explorer / Finder
2. Create a text file and add two lines of random text to it

If you're on Mac you can use `touch a-text-file` to create an empty file. Then `echo "blahblahblah" >> a-text-file` should add something to the file. Do that a second time and you'll have a file with two lines of text in it.

---

# Changes Tab

![h:520 center](./pictures/diff-add.png)

The Changes tab shows us what has changed in our files since the most recent commit.

<!-- 

Now you can see that a change in our working directory has been detected in GitHub Desktop. 

Could do a comparison here with Git command line as well?

-->

---
# Staging and Commiting Files

Once we've made some changes that we want to record, we can make a _commit_.

1. Tick the checkbox next to the file you want to include in the next commit. This _stages_ the file.
2. Give the commit a message. This should describe the changes that you have made to the file(s). You can also provide an optional description.
3. Click the blue Commit button. This will now create a new "snapshot" of our repository.

---
# History

<!-- ![h:400 center](./pictures/history.png) -->

Take a look at the History tab. You can now see the commit with its message. The right hand pane will show us what was changed in this commit.

---
# Changing / Removing Lines

Now change the _second_ line of your file and see what happens in the Changes tab.

<!-- Give people a moment to do this before going to the next slide. -->

<!-- ![h:600 center](./pictures/line-change.png) -->

<!-- Now we can see that a red line has appeared to indicate that something was removed, while a green line indicates that something was added. -->

---
# Resetting a Change

- You might change a file, then realise that this isn't actually a change you wanted.
- If you haven't commited yet then you can correct this by resetting the file.
- In GitHub Desktop this is done by right clicking the file in the Changes tab and clicking on "Discard changes..."
- This will take the file back to the state it was in in the most recent commit.

---
# Amending Commits

- Sometimes we make a slight typo in our commit messages or realise it's missing something that it ought to say.
- In this case, you'd _amend_ your commit.
- In GitHub Desktop this is done by right clicking the commit in the History tab and then changing your commit message.
- Ideally you want to do this _before_ pushing the code to GitHub. (I will talk about pushing code in a bit...)

---
# So how often to commit?

- When it _feels right_...
- When you've done a 10-15 minute "chunk" of work.
- When you have something that may doesn't fully solve the problem you're working on, but is at least a "complete" step towards solving that problem.

Smaller commits make it easier to isolate problems.

<!-- It's hard to define what exactly that point is, but it will make sense with more experience. -->

---
# Publishing a Repo

- Publishing allows us to have a copy of the repo on GitHub.
- You can hit the publish button to do this.
- Now take a look at your GitHub profile and see the repository that's been added.

<!-- Demo goes here. -->

---
# Cloning

- Make a local copy of a remote repository
- Transfer code you've written from one machine to another
- Retrieve code from someone else that's available on GitHub

---
# .gitignore

- A .gitignore file lets Git know that you don't want a certain file to be tracked with version control.
- In GitHub Desktop we can right click a file and add it to .gitignore.
- It will no longer appear in the Changes tab unless it's removed from .gitignore.
- The .gitingore file is also something you will want to track with version control.
---
# Branching

- Allows you to create an "offshoot" of your repository
- Keep the working code "safe" while you add something new to it

![h:400 center](./pictures/branch.png)

<!-- Demo if time allows -->

---
# Overview

![h:400 center](./pictures/command-diagram.svg)

If you understand this, then you pretty much understand Git :)

---
# Finding Code on GitHub


---

# Extra: Cool Git Stuff


---
#  `lazygit`

- A terminal UI for using Git.
- Nice if you're a touch-typer.
- Other alternatives to GitHub Desktop: GitKraken, `gitui`, 

---
# The magic of `bisect`

`git bisect` is actually overpowered...

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P3ZR_s3NFvM

---
# Keeping code tidy with `pre-commit`

- `pre-commit` is a tool that ensures certain checks on your file pass before a commit is accepted.
- This could be a linting tool. 

---
# Keeping track of documents with Git

![h:480 center](./pictures/latex-example.png)

LaTeX is comfy.

---

![h:480 center](./pictures/dissertation-commit-log.PNG)
